January 29, 2019.

These are notes toward finalizing a first draft of the paper.

Conventions:
S = species tree, k = species tree size, n = history size.

1. Results summary:

1. Theoretical results.
--------------------------

[DONE] Grammars for the DL and DLT models in the case of ranked and
unranked species tree.

[DONE] Precise asymptotic estimates in the DL model for the
caterpillar and complete binary tree for small values of k.

[QUESTION] Can we obtain similar results for the DLT model, for both
the caterpillar and the complete binary tree?

[QUESTION] In the DL model, can we prove a correlation between the
number of unique subtrees of S and the exponential growth? Can we
prove that the caterpillar has always the largest exponential growth
factor and the complete binary tree the smallest?

2. Code.
-----------

[DONE] Implementation in python of the code to count and sample
histories of a given size for an arbitrary S.

[TO DO] It seems the code runs into issues if k > 32, to check.

[DONE] Implementation in python of a small piece of code that, given
the system of algebraic equations that defines the exponential growth
factor, compute it. It usese the Newton-Krylov solver of SciPy.

[TO DO] This code does not check there is a unique real solution, so
there might be some checks to do to make sure this is the case.

[QUESTION] The code described above takes as input a system of
equations generated in Maple and works only for the DL model for
unranked S. Would-it be possible, given an arbitrary S, to write in
python the generation of this system, including in the ranked case?
This would avoid to have two languages needed to run the code.

3. Experiments.
-----------------

[DONE] Exact counting sequences for DL and DLT histories up to k=32
and n=50, in the unranked case, for 100 random S per value of k
(always including the caterpillar and the complete tree (if k is a
power of 2). The ratio of of the number of DLT histories over DL
histories can then be computed, which shows that the histories space
grows exponentially bigger in the DLT model compared to the DL
model. This is the main point to take from this experiment. The
results including a figure of the ratio are described in a notebook
that can be viewed at
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/cchauve/DLT-Histories/blob/master/exp/09-01-2019-exp1-redone/doc/exp1.ipynb.

[QUESTION] In the DLT model, the species trees giving respectivelly
the minimum and maximum number of DLT-histories are not always the
caterpillar and complete tree. Is-there anything to discuss there.

[QUESTION] Would a figure that would be a scatter plot that plots one
point per species tree a according to both the number of subtrees and
the exponential gowth factor for the number of DL-histories be of
interest? It would put on a same plot reslts for species trees of
different sizes (i.e. aggregate over all values of k) and might give
us a clue on a possible relationship between them.

[DONE] Asymptotics for the same species trees of the experiment
described above, we have the exponential growth factor. By taking the
ratio between the counting value at n=50 and the asymptotics formula,
we have an approximation of the constant. This is described, including
two figures, in
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/cchauve/DLT-Histories/blob/master/exp/29-01-2019-exp1-redone-2/doc/exp1a-DL-asymptotic.ipynb.

[QUESTION] Can we trust our approximation of the constant? Looking at
the results, it converges but only up to three decimals at most. Is-it
really interesting to show these constants?

[QUESTION] Is-there any interest in trying to do the same in the DLT
model?

[QUESTION] We have no experiments using ranked trees. We can certainly
take the same 100 random species tree of the previous experiments, and
generate random rankings, then compute for each the number of
DL-histories and DLT-histories. The question is now which statistics,
ideally one per tree, to record. A possibility would be to record for
each S and n the ranking giving the smallest number of histories and
the ranking giving the largest number of histories and to compute the
ratio between the two number of histories. This gives a single
statistics per pair (S,n) that can then be shown for selected values
of k and n, as in the figure on the ratio DLT histories/DL histories.

[QUESTION] Can we say anything about the distribution of the number of
duplications, or losses, or HGT for a given tree? This would require
to write extra code to obtain it, or maybe to run more experiments by
random generation of histories. I would say we have already quite a
lot of material and we could keep this for a future work.

4. Writing.
------------

[TO DO] We need a one or two figures describing histories.

[TO DO] The part on the caterpillar and complete trees are a little
long. It would be good to keep only the essential, and move the
technical details in an appendix.
